# Modeling carbon dynamics in corn cropping systems: evaluation and application based on the longest-running cropping system experiment in North America

2.  Introduction

Agriculture covers approximately 27% of the Earth's land surface (Ellis & Ramankutty, 2008) and contributes an estimated 18-25% of global carbon dioxide (CO2) emissions (Conant et al., 2011). This vast extent, combined with its significant emissions, has drawn increased attention to the sector as a key area for reducing carbon emissions (Paustian et al., 2016; Oldfield et al., 2021; Wiesmeier et al., 2020; Smith et al., 2020). Alongside forestry, agriculture represents a cost-effective, nature-based solution to climate change, mainly through improved soil management, which fosters SOC sequestration (Grissom et al., 2017; Fargione et al., 2018; Seddon, 2022). A challenge to this strategy is the highly dynamic character of agroecosystems, where SOC is in constant flux due to changing management practices (Abbas et al., 2020; Janzen, 2006). This, coupled with complex interactions between the environment and farmers’ management decisions such as N fertilizer management, residue removal, and tillage, which vary yearly, makes quantifying these fluxes challenging (Jennifer et al. 2018). 

In this context, process models provide an alternative approach to quantify SOC under a complex set of management conditions that otherwise would be difficult and very costly to measure directly across space and time due to logistical constraints (Conant et al., 2011; Jones et al., 2017; Reynolds et al., 2018; Jennifer et al., 2018; Smith et al., 2020; Colombi et al., 2024). Given this potential, interest in using process-based models to quantify the effect of sustainable agricultural management practices has increased (Mouratiadou et al., 2021; Rotter et al., 2011; Smith et al., 2020). While process-based models can effectively simulate soil organic carbon (SOC) at lower costs, the reliability of their results largely depends on how well they represent biophysical conditions and their interaction with management practices. Achieving this requires accurate parameter calibration (He et al., 2017). Thus, modelers have emphasized that these models must undergo thorough testing and evaluation before adapting to local contexts (Gaydon et al., 2017).

While the ability of process-based models to represent C dynamics has been extensively evaluated (Causarano et al., 2008; Luo et al., 2011; Mohanty et al., 2020; Necpálová et al., 2015; Stamati et al., 2013), the performance of process-based models on temporally variable management conditions that change from year to year or across decades is rarely assessed under a long-term period spanning several decades. Addressing this gap requires a flexible model to capture detailed farmer-imposed management practices (Gaydon et al., 2017), including subtle temporal changes to management decisions, and evaluate their impact on soil organic carbon. APSIM stands out for its ability to facilitate the simulation of diverse and temporally variable management practices using dynamic scripts within its management module (Cichota etal., 2021; Holzworth et al., 2018; Moore et al., 2014). Changing management practices can be simulated in real-time during the simulation cycle to reflect real field conditions over time (Moore et al., 2014). This modeling capability is key in assessing the long-term cumulative impact of various management decisions on soil processes and SOC.

While APSIM has been extensively evaluated for the prediction of SOC (e.g., Luo et al., 2011; O’Leary, 2016; Mohanty et al., 2020), most of these studies are in Australia and East Asia, focusing on the wheat cropping systems. In the US Midwest, where corn is the major cash crop (Green et al., 2018), the model has only been evaluated for the prediction of corn and soybean yields, with satisfactory relative root mean square error (RRMSE) less than 15% (Archontoulis et al. 2014, 2020). Process-based models can perform differently under different pedo-climatic conditions, as Brill et al. (2017) revealed in a global review of nine process-based models. It is, therefore, important to more fully assess the APSIM model in the Midwest region to ensure its accuracy and applicability in reflecting the unique soil, climate, and management practices specific to the area.

In agricultural landscapes dominated by annual row crops like corn, management practices involved in production play a pivotal role in influencing SOC (Hutchinson et al., 2007). Among these management practices are using N-based fertilizers, removing crop residues, and soil disturbance through tillage (Paustian et al., 2016). Crop residues, the above-ground biomass left after harvest, are crucial carbon inputs in row crop fields (Mann et al., 2002). Residue retention can boost SOC by 10-20% compared to their complete removal (Blanco-Canqui, 2013; Blanco-Canqui & Lal, 2007). Several factors affect SOC sequestration from residue, with the amount of residue returned being the most significant factor (Lal, 2014). A major factor that influences SOC sequestration from residue is N application, which increases residue biomass and influences micro-organisms' C use efficiency (Kirkby et al., 2013;Brown et al., 2014; Poirier et al., 2009).

Together, these findings suggest that residue and N application interact in some way to influence SOC dynamics in agroecosystems. Zhao et al. (2013) used a process-based model and discovered that the impact of N rate on residue carbon was non-linear. They found that rates within 0-50 kg were more effective than higher N rates across most simulated areas in Australia. However, this analysis has not yet been conducted on corn cropping systems, which have higher N requirements than wheat and produce more residue biomass (Mann et al., 2002; Power et al., 1998; Wilhelm et al., 2004). Moreover, both have different residue chemical compositions. For example, Wang et al. (2012) found a higher C/N ratio in corn residues than in wheat.

Agroecosystem simulation models provide an avenue to deeply explore these dynamics, which are somewhat challenging to elucidate with field trials. Long-term data are essential to robust model processes like SOC sequestration, the outcomes of which manifest over decades, especially under variable management decisions (Khan et al., 2007; Luo et al., 2011; Smith et al., 2020a). The Morrow Plots experiment in Urbana, Illinois, USA provides a robust dataset for calibrating and evaluating the performance of process-based models about changing management. The Morrow Plots are the longest-running cropping systems experiment in the US, dating back to 1876. The plots include three major corn cropping systems (continuous corn, corn-oats/corn-soybean, and corn-oats-red clover) and have undergone substantial management changes over time (e.g., manure application, planting density, fertilizer application, crop residue retention, tillage depth, Nafziger & Dunker, 2011). This experiment has been instrumental in studying the long-term effects of different management practices on soil fertility and crop productivity (Aref & Wander, 2013; Nafziger & Dunker, 2011; Odell et al., 1984).

Our objectives with this study were two-fold. First, we evaluated how well APSIM captures long-term SOC dynamics across two distinct corn cropping systems, subject to temporally variable management practices such as N fertilization, residue retention, and tillage. This evaluation was based on 105 years of long-term experimental data from the Morrow Plots and focused on APSIM's responsiveness to evolving management practices. Our second objective was to use the calibrated APSIM model to determine C sequestration as SOC under different soil physical attributes, levels, and timing of N-based fertilization and crop residue retention rates. We conducted a modeling experiment to meet this second objective in which a factorial combination of N fertilization and crop residue retention rates were simulated for over 105 years. We asked three questions: 1) How well does APSIM predict SOC over an extended period and with changing management? 2) To what extent does the interaction of N fertilizer application and crop residue retention influence SOC sequestration and stocks in corn cropping systems? 3) How do soil physical properties and management factors interact to affect SOC?? We discuss the implications of our simulation results within the context of the current literature and for SOC management.

* * *

## Drafts

Process-based models have significant advantages over traditional experimental trials. They have the potential to reduce the need for costly and time-consuming empirical studies. For instance, it is nearly impossible to analyze the dynamics of SOC under various combinations of climatic conditions, site properties, and management regimes under a vast number of potential scenarios. Process-based models, on the other hand, can virtually simulate these scenarios, offering valuable insights into ecosystem behavior without the logistical and financial constraints of large-scale field experiments.

* * *

Agriculture plays a significant role in both emitting and sequestering carbon, accounting for approximately 18-25% of global carbon dioxide (CO2) emissions and about 25% of the Earth's terrestrial soil carbon pool. While improved agricultural management can help reduce emissions and increase carbon storage, it is challenging to quantify these changes due to the dynamic nature of agroecosystems and the lack of accurate, accessible, and reliable data (Jandl et al., 2014). For example, it is nearly impossible to analyze the dynamics of soil organic carbon (SOC) under various combinations of climatic conditions, site properties, and management regimes in one experimental trial. Process-based simulation models provide a cost-effective and practical solution by integrating available environmental data with agroecosystem management practices to simulate complex SOC dynamics.

All modeling exercises need to be validated with ground truth data. '

## From Gaydon et al (2007)

In this paper, we present details of APSIM evaluation across diverse cropping systems in Asia and critically evaluate its performance, identifying strengths and weaknesses using 43 experimental datasets from 12 countries, covering a broad spectrum of management practices, crop species/varieties, and environments, evaluating the hypothesis that APSIM is a robust model for use in Asian cropping systems research. As part of this process, we document input parameter estimation challenges and indicated needs for further improvement of the model.

Evaluation of APSIM is well-established and well-documented in Australia and Africa, however limited in Asia as the model’s capability to simulate rice-based systems in this region is relatively recent. Also, rice is grown in more diverse cropping situations than most other crops (lowland (ponded), upland (un-ponded), puddled, un-puddled), necessitating more faceted evaluation. The first step in evaluating a model’s credentials is to define model capacities required for addressing research questions around some of the aforementioned issues. We suggest that a model for simulation of cropping system performance in Asia should be capable of several key functions: (i) robust crop development and yield simulation for a wide variety of crops; (ii) the ability to simulate cropping sequences and the effect of different fallow management, tillage and residue management strategies on system performance; (iii) robust simulation of soil water and nutrient dynamics in conjunction with crop performance; (iv) flexibility to capture detailed farmer-imposed management practices, including subtle changes to farmer decisions and strategies, and evaluate their impact on system performance; and (v) robust simulation of crop response to CO2 and temperature variation (  
Rötter et al., 2011). Before a researcher can be confident in employing such a model, it should be rigorously tested in a wide variety of environments and management practices.

challanges for measuring soil organic carbon

# 1\. Measuring and monitoring soil organic carbon stocks in agricultural lands for climate mitigation

https://esajournals.onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/pdf/10.1890/090153

• The main challenge in documenting plot-level changes in SOC stocks is in designing an efficient, cost-effective sampling and SOC stock estimation system (conant et al 2011)

# Estimating the contribution of crop residues to soil organic carbon conservation

[text](https://iopscience.iop.org/article/10.1088/1748-9326/ab395c/pdf)

From me

The increasing interest in using APSIM in the U.S. Midwest is driven by its proven potential in accurately predicting crop yields within the Corn Belt. The model has demonstrated a strong performance, achieving a relative root mean square error (RRMSE) of less than 15% (Archontoulis et al., 2014, 2020). APSIM has been widely applied to study various agricultural aspects, such as the impact of cover crops on crop production (Basche et al., 2016; Chatterjee et al., 2020), crop responses to nitrogen dynamics (Puntel et al., 2016), effects of management practices on water quality (Malone et al., 2007), and evaluation of crop yield gaps (Balboa et al., 2019). However, despite these extensive applications, its use in predicting soil organic carbon (SOC) dynamics remains limited and underexplored in this region. While APSIM has been thoroughly tested for SOC prediction in semi-arid and sub-tropical areas of Australia and East Asia, primarily focusing on wheat cropping systems (Luo et al., 2011; O’Leary, 2016; Mohanty et al., 2020), its evaluation in the U.S. Midwest, where corn is the dominant cash crop (Green et al., 2018), is still insufficiently studied. This region's unique humid continental climate further distinguishes it from other environments where APSIM has been tested.

While APSIM has been thoroughly tested for SOC prediction in semi-arid and sub-tropical regions of Australia and East Asia, with a focus primarily on wheat cropping systems (Luo et al., 2011; O’Leary, 2016; Mohanty et al., 2020), its application in the U.S. Midwest, where maize is the dominant cash crop, remains underexplored. This region presents distinct climatic and cropping systems due to its humid continental climate and prevalence of corn as the major cash crop, which differs significantly from the semi-arid and sub-tropical climates where previous studies have validated APSIM's SOC prediction capabilities. As a result, more research is needed to evaluate APSIM's performance in this critical agricultural zone.

This challenges the rapid development of innovative agricultural practices that can sequester SOC. The ability to rapidly and cost-effectively quantify SOC is valuable for assessing the impact of different management strategies in complex agricultural systems under complex scenarios 